“A Malaysia that belongs to everyone
regardless of age, race, religion,
background or geography. We are
entrusted with this new hope as our
duty.”
2020 BUDGET SPEECH
BY YB TUAN LIM GUAN ENG
MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING
THE SUPPLY BILL (2020)
IN DEWAN RAKYAT
FRIDAY, 11 OCTOBER 2019
“DRIVING GROWTH AND EQUITABLE OUTCOMES TOWARDS
SHARED PROSPERITY”
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
1. I beg to move the Bill intituled “An Act to apply a sum
from the Consolidated Fund for the service of the year 2020
and to appropriate that sum for the service of that year” be
read a second time.
INTRODUCTION
2. Greetings, Salam Harapan and Salam Sayangi Malaysiaku,
I bid to the Honourable Speaker, Honourable Members of
Parliament of both the Government and the Opposition, and to
all Malaysians. We are grateful that by God’s grace, Malaysia
continues to be a peaceful, stable and prosperous nation.
3. First and foremost, allow me to convey my undivided loyalty
and my congratulations on the coronation of Kebawah Duli Yang
Maha Mulia Seri Paduka Baginda Yang Dipertuan Agong Ke-16,
Al-Sultan Abdullah Ri’ayatuddin Al-Mustafa Billah Shah Ibni
Almarhum Sultan Haji Ahmad Shah Al-Musta’in Billah.
4. I am humbled to stand before you to table the 2020 Budget.
This is the second budget to be tabled under the Pakatan Harapan
Government. Indeed, 2020 is a special year given that Wawasan
2020 was envisioned by our YAB Prime Minister Tun Dr Mahathir
bin Mohamad nearly three decades ago in 1991, to celebrate
Malaysia joining the ranks of developed nations. Vision 2020
would have succeeded, if not for the massive financial scandals,
corruption and mismanagement of the previous Government.
5. The first Pakatan Harapan Budget tabled in 2018 focused
on fiscal consolidation and rationalisation, institutional reforms
and people-centric policies to right the many wrongs of the
previous administration. For this Budget, the theme is on “Driving
Growth And Equitable Outcomes Towards Shared Prosperity”.
The Government is committed to bringing stability to the
Government’s finances and achieving the goal of Vision 2020
with a new growth trajectory under the foundation of “Shared
Prosperity Vision 2030” as initiated by YAB Prime Minister, Tun
Dr Mahathir bin Mohamad.
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE AND CHALLENGES
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
6. The global economy has been thrown into a state of
uncertainty caused by the trade war between the United States
and other nations, especially the People’s Republic of China. The
International Monetary Fund (IMF) has revised downwards the
global economic growth forecast for the year 2019 from 3.9% in
July 2018 to 3.2% in July 2019. The World Trade Organisation
(WTO) has also reduced the forecast for world merchandise trade
growth for 2019 from 2.6% in April 2019 to 1.2% in October 2019,
the lowest since 2009.
7. As a trading nation, Malaysia cannot avoid being affected
by these external headwinds. However, with economic policies
and reforms implemented by the Pakatan Harapan government,
our economy will remain resilient. In the first half of 2019, GDP
growth was 4.7%, with a growth rate of 4.9% in the 2nd quarter.
Indeed, Malaysia is one of the few economies in the world that
experienced faster growth in the second quarter compared to
the previous quarter.
8. The Government has also been very successful in taming
inflation, with 0.2% recorded in the first half of 2019 compared
to 1.0% and 3.7% for the whole of 2018 and 2017 respectively.
Clearly the Goods and Services Tax (GST) implemented under the
previous regime had contributed significantly to higher prices.
By abolishing the GST of 6% in June 2018 and replacing it with
the Sales and Services Tax (SST) regime in September 2018, the
country’s inflation rate has been reduced to its lowest levels since
2007. For the full year of 2019, the inflation rate is expected to
be at 0.9%. To respect the mandate given by the Rakyat in last
year’s General Elections, the Government does not intend to
bring back GST.
9. Despite the global trade war, Malaysian exports only
shrank marginally for the first 8 months of 2019 by 0.4% from a
year ago. Malaysian exports are still expected to record positive
growth for 2019. During the same period, Malaysia recorded
RM92.5 billion worth of trade surplus, which is 28.7% larger than
the RM71.9 billion recorded during the same period in 2018.
10. This healthy trade balance will keep the country’s current
account in surplus for the year. Overall, Malaysia’s balance
of payments continues to be firmly positive, with the current
account surplus for 2019 is expected at RM43.4 billion or 2.9%
of Gross National Income (GNI). Meanwhile, as at 30 September
2019 our international reserves remain healthy at RM431.3 billion
or USD103 billion, which is sufficient to finance 7.6 months of
retained imports and is 1.1 times of our external short-term
debts.
11. The Malaysian financial system also remains sound and
stable, despite a challenging global environment and high degree
of volatility in the international financial markets throughout
the year.
2020 BUDGET THEME - DRIVING GROWTH AND EQUITABLE
OUTCOMES TOWARDS SHARED PROSPERITY
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
12. We as Malaysians have a shared responsibility to rebuild
the nation. Therefore, extensive consultations for Budget 2020 with
stakeholders were undertaken. On top of the Budget Consultation
hosted at the Ministry of Finance, we had a total of 12 Focus
Group sessions held together with other Ministries and state
governments all around the country involving over 2,500 people
representing over 1,200 organisations.
13. The four thrusts anchoring the 2020 Budget are:
FIRST : Driving Economic Growth in the New Economy and
Digital Era
SECOND : Investing in Malaysians: Levelling Up Human Capital
THIRD : Creating a United, Inclusive and Equitable Society
FOURTH : Revitalisation of Public Institutions and Finances
FIRST THRUST: DRIVING ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THE NEW
ECONOMY AND DIGITAL ERA
Strategy 1: Making Malaysia the Preferred Destination for
Investment
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
14. During YAB Tun Dr Mahathir’s first stint as the Prime
Minister, he led Malaysia to its fastest decade of economic
growth from 1988 to 1997 at an average annual GDP growth rate
of 9.3%, marking the country’s ascent to be an Asian Economic
Tiger. The influx of Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs) had not
only brought in new jobs with better wages, new businesses into
the market and new economic opportunities, it also structurally
upgraded Malaysia from being an agriculture-based domesticcentric
economy into an industrialised export-oriented nation.
15. However, at the turn of the century, Malaysia’s economic
growth tapered off to an average of 5.1% since 2000. The premature
deindustrialisation of the Malaysian economy resulted in the shift
of our economy to one that is more reliant on labour intensive,
low-skill, and low-cost structure. As a result, we remain trapped
as a middle-income nation that has been hindered from becoming
a truly developed economy based on productivity, innovation and
shared prosperity.
Trade War Opportunities
16. The protracted trade war creates a unique opportunity for
Malaysia to again be the preferred destination for high valueadded
Foreign Direct Investments (FDI). The shift in the global
supply chain investments has witnessed approved FDI increasing
by 47% to RM80.1 billion in 2018 from RM54.4 billion in 2017.
17. For the first half of this year, approved FDI increased by
97% to RM49.5 billion from RM25.1 billion in the same period
last year. The approved manufacturing FDI from the United States
of America (US) was the highest at RM11.7 billion, followed by
the People’s Republic of China at RM4.8 billion. As China is our
largest trading partner, FDI from China should be comparable
with the US. As such, a ‘Special Channel’ to attract investments
from China shall be established under InvestKL.
18. To overcome delays in approving foreign and domestic
investments, we have established the National Committee on
Investment (NCI), jointly chaired by the Minister of Finance and
the Minister of International Trade and Industry. In our inaugural
meeting on 28 August this year, three investments worth RM2.2
billion were approved.
19. This year, the Government has embarked on a comprehensive
review and revamp of the existing incentive framework, comprising
the Promotion of Investments Act 1986, special incentive package
and incentives under the Income Tax Act 1967. This new framework
is expected to be ready by 1 January 2021.
20. The Government will make available up to RM1 billion
worth of customised packaged investment incentives annually
over five years, as part of the strategic push to attract targeted
Fortune 500 companies and global unicorns in high technology,
manufacturing, creative and new economic sectors. To qualify,
these companies must invest at least RM5 billion each in Malaysia
which will generate additional economic activities that will
support our Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs), create 150,000
high quality jobs over the next five years and strengthen our
manufacturing and service ecosystems.
21. To transform Malaysia’s best and most promising
businesses into the most competitive enterprises in global
export markets, the Government will also make available up
to RM1 billion in customised packaged investment incentives
annually over five years. These incentives are strictly conditional
upon these companies proving their ability to grow and export
their products and services globally. We expect this measure to
significantly strengthen our local supply chain ecosystem and
create additional 100,000 high quality jobs for Malaysians over
the next five years.
22. In addition to expediting approval of investments, the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) will give
additional focus on post-approval investment monitoring and
realisation. For this purpose, the Government will allocate RM10
million.
23. The Government will also provide tax incentives to
further promote high-value added activities in the Electrical and
Electronics (E&E) industry to transition into 5G digital economy
and Industry 4.0. These incentives include:
First : Income tax exemption up to 10 years to E&E
companies investing in qualifying knowledge-based
services; and
Second : Special Investment Tax Allowance to encourage
companies in E&E sector that have exhausted the
Reinvestment Allowance to further reinvest in
Malaysia.
24. In addition, to encourage automation and to increase
company’s productivity, it is proposed:
First : Accelerated capital allowance and automation
equipment capital allowance for manufacturing sector
on the first RM2 million and RM4 million incurred
on qualifying capital expenditure is extended to the
year of assessment 2023; and
Second : The incentive is also expanded to include services
sector on the first RM2 million incurred on qualifying
capital expenditure from the year of assessment
2020 to the year of assessment 2023.
Improving Competitiveness
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
25. The Pakatan Harapan Government is committed to
continuously improve the business climate in Malaysia. One of
the key reforms to be implemented is to improve the ease of
doing business in Malaysia by reducing the number of steps to
register a business.
26. It goes without saying that well-functioning ports and
logistics system is crucial for a trading nation like ours. The
World Economic Forum (WEF) 2018 Global Competitiveness Report
ranks Malaysia’s sea transport infrastructures is one of the best
in the world.
27. Port Klang is currently the 12th busiest container port in
the world and is expected to reach full capacity in the next five
years. For the next phase of growth, the Government is undertaking
an in-depth feasibility study on the development of Pulau Carey.
This is to make Port Klang as a regional maritime centre and
cargo logistics hub combining manufacturing, distribution, cargo
consolidation, bunkering and ship repairs.
28. The Government will allocate RM50 million for the repair
and maintenance of roads leading to Port Klang. The Ministry of
Transport will commence feasibility studies on the Serendah-Port
Klang Rail Bypass for cargo shipments and the Klang Logistics
Corridor, a dedicated privatised highway connecting Northport and
Westport for commercial vehicles, with both projects estimated
to cost RM8.3 billion.
29. To better facilitate trade movement through our ports,
the Royal Malaysian Customs Department (RMCD) will introduce
a deferred payment facility to expedite the clearance process of
cross border transactions. This will reduce the time and cost for
cross border trade significantly.
30. Beyond our sea ports, the Government intends to strengthen
trade with Thailand via our 100-acre logistics hub, Kota Perdana
Special Border Economic Zone (SBEZ) at Bukit Kayu Hitam.
Further to the development of a Truck Depot as announced in
Budget 2019, the Government will allocate an additional RM50
million to stimulate public-private partnerships for the project.
The Government would provide support for the construction of
primary infrastructure, while the private sector will invest in
critical business assets to catalyse potential domestic investment
worth RM800 million which would provide job opportunities to
more than 600 people.
31. RM1.1 billion is allocated in 2020 to support projects for
corridor development activities including:
First : RM50 million for the development of Chuping Valley
Industrial Area in Perlis by NCIA;
Second : RM69.5 million for Kuantan Port related projects by
ECERDC;
Third : RM42 million for the construction of Sungai Segget
Centralised Sewerage Treatment Plant in Johor by
IRDA;
Fourth : RM55 million for infrastructure in the Samalaju
Industrial Park in Sarawak by RECODA; and
Fifth : RM20 million for the Sabah Agro-Industrial Precinct
by SEDIA
Strategy 2: Accelerating the Digital Economy
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
Building Digital Infrastructure
32. YAB Prime Minister launched Malaysia into the Information
and Communications Technology (ICT) era with the establishment
of the Multimedia Super Corridor (MSC) in 1996. We are now
entering the digital era. This Government is committed towards
digital transformation.
33. For the past year, the regulatory reforms implemented
by the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission
(MCMC) on the Mandatory Standard on Access Pricing (MSAP)
has successfully lowered broadband prices by 49% and triggered
a shift in consumer demand for faster internet connections. The
World Bank has praised the Government for accelerating average
broadband speed by three times in just one year.
34. Now, the Government will create the necessary infrastructure
to construct a Digital Malaysia by implementing the National
Fiberisation & Connectivity Plan (NFCP) over the next five years
which will provide comprehensive coverage of high speed and
quality digital connectivity nationwide including rural areas. The
NFCP will adopt a public private partnership approach involving
a total investment of RM21.6 billion. The Government, through
MCMC, will finance at least half of the required investment with
corresponding investments by the private sector telecommunications
players via a matching grant mechanism.
35. As part of NFCP, we will improve connectivity in remote
areas of Malaysia, especially in Sabah and Sarawak, to ensure
that no one is left behind in our digital drive. MCMC will allocate
RM250 million to leverage on various technologies, including via
satellite broadband connectivity.
36. In addition, the Government will allocate RM210 million
to accelerate the deployment of new digital infrastructure for
public buildings particularly schools and also high impact areas
such as industrial parks. Priority will be given to locations within
states that are able to facilitate and expedite the implementation
of the NFCP.
Building Digital Applications
37. The vigorous rollout of the NFCP will be key to bringing
5G technology and services to the Malaysian public. To seed
technological developments by Malaysian companies to ride
the global 5G wave, which is 100 times faster than 4G, the
Government will introduce a 5G Ecosystem Development Grant worth
RM50 million.
38. In addition, an allocation of RM25 million will be given
to set up a contestable matching grant fund to spur more
pilot projects on digital applications such as drone delivery,
autonomous vehicle, blockchain technology, and other products
and services that leverage on our investments in fibre optics
and 5G infrastructure.
39. Digital content creates economic value. For instance,
the global video gaming industry today has revenue upward of
USD150 billion, higher than both the music and movie industries
combined. Therefore, we will allocate RM20 million to Malaysian
Digital Economy Corporation (MDEC) to grow local champions in
creating digital content, especially in e-Games, animation and
digital arts.
Building Digital Companies
40. To build a Digital Malaysia, the private sector must come
onboard. More Malaysian Small Medium Enterprise (SMEs) need
to adopt digitalisation measures for their business operations,
including electronic Point Of Sale systems (e-POS), Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) and electronic payroll system. The
Government will provide a 50% matching grant of up to RM5,000
per company for the subscription of the above services. This
matching grant will be worth RM500 million over five years, limited
to the first 100,000 SMEs applying to upgrade their systems.
41. The Government will also allocate RM550 million to provide
Smart Automation matching grants to 1,000 manufacturing and
1,000 services companies to automate their business processes.
This grant will be given on a matching basis up to RM2 million
per company.
42. The Government plans to build up to 14 one-stop Digital
Enhancement Centres in all states to facilitate access to financing
and capacity building of our businesses, especially SMEs in line
with the Fourth Industrial Revolution (IR4.0). A budget of RM70
million will be allocated to MDEC to set up these centres as an
extension of the ‘100 Go Digital’ programme. To also promote
knowledge sharing and education through digital enabled content,
the Government proposes to establish three new digital libraries
in Kedah, Perak and Johor.
43. Programmes such as the Coach and Grow Programme
(CGP) by Cradle Fund for high impact technology entrepreneurs
involving 469 companies to date have generated RM2.3 billion
in revenues, including RM300 million in exports. As part of
the Government’s continued commitment to promote early
stage innovations, the Government will provide RM20 million
to Cradle Fund for the provision of training and grants to seed
companies.
Building Digital Malaysians
44. To ensure gains arising from successful digital companies
are shared with the Rakyat, the Government will introduce
the concept of Digital Social Responsibility (DSR). DSR is the
commitment by businesses, to contribute to digital economic
development while improving the digital skills of the future
workforce with initiatives such as technology scholarships,
training and upskilling for digital skills for communities in need.
Contributions towards DSR activities by the companies will be
given tax deduction.
45. We will continue providing funds of RM10 million to
MDEC to train micro-digital entrepreneurs and technologists
to leverage on e-Marketplaces and social media platforms to
sell their products. 100 of these micro-digital entrepreneurs, a
majority of whom are women and youth, were able to generate
RM23 million in revenues over just 6 months, unleashing life
changing experiences.
46. The Pakatan Harapan government recognises the growing
potential of eSports and will provide an increased allocation of
RM20 million for 2020. We wish our Malaysian team the very
best of luck to bring home many gold medals from the Southeast
Asian Games in Manila in December 2019.
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
47. Malaysia’s transformation into a digital economy will
only realised with the Rakyat’s adoption of digital culture and
participation in digital transactions towards a cashless society.
According to Bank Negara Malaysia’s Financial Sector Blueprint
for 2011 to 2020, Malaysia stands to gain about 1% in cost
savings to our GDP annually by switching fully to e-payments
processes and becoming a cashless society. This is at a time
where mobile payment transaction volume had increased twentyfold
to over 34 million transactions in 2018 from just below
2 million transactions in 2017. However, the overall adoption of
e-wallet remains low at only 8%, based on a survey report by
Nielsen in January this year.
48. To significantly increase the number of Malaysians,
participating merchants and SMEs to use e-wallets, the
Government will offer a one-time RM30 digital stimulus to
qualified Malaysians aged 18 and above with annual income
less than RM100,000. All you need is to own an identity-verified
e-wallet account with selected service providers. The one-time
digital stimulus per person can be redeemed and used for a
two-month period commencing 1 January 2020 and expiring on
29 February 2020. The Government will allocate up to RM450
million to Khazanah Nasional to implement this digital stimulus,
which will benefit up to 15 million Malaysians.
Strategy 3: Strengthening Access to Financing for Businesses
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
49. To better facilitate access to financing for SMEs in priority
segments, the Government will implement enhancements to the
Skim Jaminan Pembiayaan Perniagaan (SJPP). For Bumiputera
SMEs, export-oriented SMEs and SMEs investing in automation
and digitalisation, the Government guarantee will be increased
from 70% to 80% and in addition, will reduce the guarantee
fee to only 0.75%. A new SJPP allocation of RM500 million in
guarantee facility will also be launched, earmarked for women
entrepreneurs.
50. To further support our up and coming entrepreneurs, SME
Bank will introduce two new funds where the Government will
provide an annual interest subsidy of 2% to reduce borrowing
costs as follows:
First : RM200 million fund specifically for women
entrepreneurs, offering loans of up to RM1 million
per SME; and
Second : RM300 million fund to support Bumiputera SMEs
with the potential to become regional champions,
with priority given to producers of halal products
and manufacturers with high local content.
51. The Government will allocate RM10 million to the Ministry
of Entrepreneur Development to focus on advocacy and awareness
for halal certification, halal product development and providing
platforms for local players to tap on the USD3 trillion global
halal market.
52. For SMEs to remain competitive, they must continually
expand their exports. The Pakatan Harapan Government will
increase the ceiling per company for the Market Development
Grant (MDG) initiative by Malaysia External Trade Development
Corporation (MATRADE) from the current RM200,000 to
RM300,000 yearly. At the same time, the ceiling for the
participation in each export fair will also be revised upwards
from RM15,000 to RM25,000. The Government will also allocate
RM50 million to encourage SMEs to engage in more export
promotion activities.
53. In the era of fintech, Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) is
finalising the licensing framework for digital banks to be issued
by year end for public consultation. The final framework will be
issued by the first half of 2020 to invite applications.
54. The Government will support and encourage new
digital financial innovations such as Equity CrowdFunding
(ECF) and Peer-to-Peer (P2P) platforms. Collectively, more than
RM430 million was raised as at June 2019, benefitting more than
1,200 SMEs. Building on this early success, the Government will
further allocate an additional RM50 million to My Co-Investment
Fund (MyCIF) under the Securities Commission Malaysia to
leverage such platforms to help finance the underserved SMEs.
55. To further encourage alternative sources of funding for
start-ups companies and to attract more foreign investment
to Malaysia, tax incentives given to venture capital and angel
investors will be extended until the year 2023.
56. To catalyse and promote financing to construction
consortiums bidding for projects and concessions overseas, the
Government will provide a RM1 billion 1:5 matching guarantee
for dedicated private equity funds to invest in Malaysian
consortiums.
57. To support Bumiputera entrepreneurial development, grants
amounting to RM445 million will be provided in terms of access
to financing, provision of business premises and entrepreneur
training. This includes:
First : RM150 million for overall entrepreneurship development
and upskilling by Perbadanan Usahawan Nasional
Berhad (PUNB);
Second : RM75 million by SMECorp for capacity building and
export focus for Bumiputera SMEs, which includes
enhancing marketing, packaging, and financial
literacy;
Third : RM170 million in total for access of financing via
TEKUN, SME Bank and Pelaburan Hartanah Berhad
(PHB); and
Fourth : RM50 million for entrepreneurship under Unit
Peneraju Agenda Bumiputera (TERAJU), Ministry of
Economic Affairs.
58. The Government will continue to support strategic projects
through financing programmes under Bank Pembangunan Malaysia
Berhad (BPMB), offering a 2% interest subsidy per annum via:
First : Sustainable Development Financing Fund size
increased from RM1 billion to RM2 billion;
Second : RM1 billion Maritime & Logistics Fund; and
Third : RM2 billion Industry Digitalisation Transformation
Fund which will now also support the implementation
of connectivity projects.
59. Unlike the previous administration, which handed out
small business loans to their politically-linked co-operatives the
Pakatan Harapan administration has separated politics and public
funding, by providing RM100 million for Small Business Loans
(Program Pembiayaan Usahawan Perusahaan Kecil Komuniti Cina)
for the Chinese community via Bank Simpanan Nasional with
more than 380 branches throughout the country, at an interest
rate of 4%.
60. For Indian entrepreneurs, the Government will provide
RM20 million under TEKUN Nasional’s Skim Pembangunan
Usahawan Masyarakat India (SPUMI) which is expected to benefit
1,300 entrepreneurs at an interest rate of 4%.
Restructuring Development Financial Institutions (DFIs)
61. Development Financial Institutions (DFIs) play an important
role as public institutions that support the nation’s development
goals and serve the needs and requirements of the new economy.
To strengthen the development finance ecosystem, Bank Negara
Malaysia is proposing a 2-phase restructuring plan for our DFIs
to form a new financial institution through the merger of Bank
Pembangunan Malaysia, Danajamin Nasional, SME Bank, and
the Export-Import Bank of Malaysia.
Growing Islamic Finance
62. This year, the Ministry of Finance established the Special
Committee on Islamic Finance (JKKI) chaired by the Yang Berhormat
Deputy Minister of Finance, with the main objective of further
promoting and developing the Islamic Finance ecosystem. To
position Malaysia as the centre of excellence for Islamic finance,
this special committee will:
First : Formulate the Islamic Economic Blueprint, with all
relevant agencies; and
Second : Organise outreach initiatives and professional courses
to promote deeper understanding of Islamic Finance
nationwide.
63. The current tax deductions on the cost of issuance
and additional deductions on sukuk issuance costs under the
principle of Wakalah will be extended for 5 years until year of
assessment 2025.
64. To further promote Islamic fund and Sustainable and
Responsible Investment (SRI) fund management activity, the tax
exemption for fund management companies managing Shariah
compliant funds and SRI funds, and the tax deduction on the
cost of issuing SRI Sukuk will be extended for another three
years until year of assessment 2023.
Strategy 4: Strengthening Economic Diversity
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
65. In order to achieve economic diversity to expand growth,
there will be specific measures on four areas: green economy,
agriculture, Research and Development (R&D), and tourism.
Green Growth and Energy for the Future
66. As part of the liberalisation of the electricity market, the
Government has decided to migrate the current power purchase
system towards a wholesale market in the future. Renewable
energy suppliers will also be able to compete directly in the retail
market. The more transparent and competitive electricity market
will ensure a lower cost of electricity for Malaysian consumers.
67. The Government intends to attain Malaysia’s goal to generate
20% of our energy consumption from renewable sources by 2025.
Last year, we had significantly expanded the qualifying list of
green assets for Green Investment Tax Allowance (GITA) under the
MyHijau directory. For Budget 2020, we are happy to announce
that the GITA and Green Income Tax Exemption (GITE) incentives
will be extended to 2023. A 70% income tax exemption of up to
10 years will be given to companies undertaking solar leasing
activities.
68. Through Energy Performance Contracting (EPC), the
upfront capital investment into energy saving equipment for
Government buildings will be repaid through the savings in
utility costs achieved. In 2020, the Government will accelerate EPC
implementation for Government buildings, prioritising hospitals
and education institutions.
Commodity Development
69. The Government is concerned by the impact of low
commodity prices on the livelihoods of Malaysians in this
sector, particularly the smallholders. At the same time we are
disappointed and unhappy with the staged efforts aimed at
curtailing market access for our palm oil exports by the European
Union (EU) and the United States. For the palm oil sector, this
Government intends to support this industry with the following
measures:
First : RM550 million palm oil replanting loan fund for
smallholders collateral-free at an interest rate of 2%
per annum, with a tenure of 12 years including a
four year moratorium on repayment. The replanting
will be undertaken using the latest seedlings and
also in compliance with Malaysian Sustainable Palm
Oil (MSPO) standards to ensure better productivity
and marketability;
Second : An allocation of RM27 million to support Malaysian
Palm Oil Board’s (MPOB) efforts to market palm oil
internationally and counter anti-palm oil campaigns;
and
Third : Enhance implementation of biodiesel, with the B20
biodiesel for the transport sector to be implemented
by the end of 2020. This is expected to increase
palm oil demand by 500,000 tonnes per annum.
70. The Government recognises the hardships caused by low
rubber prices and low yield during the rainy seasons. Hence we
will allocate RM200 million for Bantuan Musim Tengkujuh to
eligible rubber smallholders under RISDA and Lembaga Industri
Getah Sabah (LIGS). The Government will provide RM100 million
for Rubber Production Incentive in 2020 to enhance the income
of smallholders faced with low rubber prices.
71. The Government will allocate RM810 million for the
welfare of FELDA community, as follows:
First : RM250 million for an income enhancement program
benefiting 11,600 settlers;
Second : RM300 million to write-off the interest of the settlers’
debts;
Third : RM100 million for the FELDA water supply projects;
Fourth : RM70 million for housing the new generation of
FELDA settlers; and
Fifth : RM90 million for the upgrading of FELDA roads and
basic infrastructure.
72. Separately, we will provide RM738 million for RISDA and
Federal Land Consolidation and Rehabilitation Authority (FELCRA)
to implement various income-generating programmes to benefit
the more than 300,000 RISDA and 100,000 FELCRA smallholders.
Increasing the Incomes of Farmers
73. The Government has increased the allocation to
the Ministry of Agriculture from RM4.4 billion in 2019 to
RM4.9 billion in 2020, with a special focus towards enhancing
incomes of farmers.
74. For 2020, the Government proposes to increase the
fishermen allowance from RM200 to RM250 per month, with a
total allocation of RM152 million for 2020.
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
75. To help our farmers, fishermen and smallholders
diversify their income, the Government is allocating a sum of
RM150 million to facilitate crop integration to help supplement
their income such as through chili, pineapple, coconut, watermelon
and bamboo.
76. Government also intends to make the glutinous rice a
signature product of Langkawi Island and provide farmers with
a higher income. To support this initiative, the Government will
allocate RM30 million for the production of glutinous rice in
Langkawi Island which is expected to benefit 1,200 farmers.
77. To raise the padi yield, the Government will increase
the allocation for padi inputs from RM796 million in 2019 to
RM855 million in 2020 under the Skim Baja Padi Kerajaan
Persekutuan (SBPKP) and Skim Insentif Pengeluaran Padi (SIPP).
In addition, the Government will continue the subsidy for Padi
Bukit and Padi Huma.
78. Finally, we will allocate RM43 million for Agriculture
Industry 4.0 to develop new crop varieties with higher productivity
and quality.
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
Enhancing Research & Development (R&D) Framework
79. Malaysia’s global ranking has improved from 37th in
the world in 2017 to 35th in the world in 2019 in the Global
Innovation Index (GII) as published by the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO). However, we must not stop there.
We will continue enhancing Malaysia’s R&D framework by:
First : Intensifying R&D in the public sector with an allocation
of RM524 million to Ministries and Public Agencies;
Second : The Government will also allocate RM30 million
for R&D matching grants for collaborations with
industry and academia to develop higher value added
downstream uses of palm oil, specifically tocotrienol
in pharmaceuticals and bio-jet fuel;
Third : The Government will establish a Research Management
Agency, with an allocation of RM10 million to
centralise and coordinate management of public
research resources;
Fourth : To promote commercialisation of R&D from the
public sector, research universities beginning with
the University of Malaya, will establish a one-stop
Innovation Office to transform intellectual property
into commercially exploitable opportunities; and
Fifth : IP-generated income based on the Modified Nexus
Approach (MNA) derived from patents and copyright
software will be given tax exemption for a period
of up to 10 years.
80. The Government will allocate RM11 million towards
initiatives by the Ministry of Education in collaboration with
Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Climate Change
(MESTECC) to inculcate the Science, Technology and Innovation
(STI) culture, encouraging more students into the fields of Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM).
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
Visit Malaysia 2020
81. Visit Malaysia 2020 (VMY2020) is the Government’s primary
effort to brand Malaysia as a top destination for tourism, with a
target of achieving 30 million tourist arrivals. The Government
will continue to allocate 50% of tourism tax to respective
State Governments to support their efforts in conjunction with
VMY2020. To fulfil the aspirations of VMY2020, the Government
has allocated RM1.1 billion to the Ministry of Tourism, Arts
and Culture, including an allocation of RM90 million to drive
awareness, promotions and programmes for the VMY2020
campaign. A substantial portion of the departure levy imposed
on outbound air passengers beginning 1 September 2019 will
be allocated for tourism infrastructure projects.
82. To amplify the economic benefits of VMY2020, the
Government will roll out a host of tax incentives targeted at the
arts and tourism sector, such as:
First : Income tax exemption be given for organisers of
approved arts and cultural activities, international
sports and recreational competitions as well as
conferences organisers;
Second : New investments in international theme park projects
will be given income tax exemption of 100% of
statutory income or Investment Tax Allowance of
100% to be set off against 70% for five years;
Third : Increasing tax deductions given to companies
sponsoring arts, cultural and heritage activities
in Malaysia from RM700,000 to RM1,000,000
per year;
Fourth : Accelerated Capital Allowance for expenditure incurred
on the purchase of new locally assembled excursion
bus to be fully claimed within two years; and
Fifth : Excise duty exemption of 50% for locally assembled
vehicles be given to tour operators for the purchase
of qualified new tourism vehicles.
83. The funicular train service to Penang Hill will achieve
more than two million passengers per year, exceeding its
capacity. The Government will contribute RM100 million
towards the construction of a new cable car system to Penang
Hill, with any additional costs to be financed by the State
Government.
84. In addition, the Government will allocate RM5 million to
Cultural Economy Development Agency (CENDANA) to support
Malaysian visual art galleries and exhibition organisers in holding
art exhibitions. In addition, RM10 million will be allocated to
Think City to preserve culture and urban heritage.
85. Among the VMY2020 programmes, we are also having
Malaysia Year of Healthcare Travel 2020 to solidify Malaysia’s
leading position as a medical tourist destination in the region.
Medical tourism is a rapidly expanding sector in Malaysia,
growing 17% annually from 2015 until 2018. In 2018, it generated
RM1.5 billion revenue receipts from 1.2 million healthcare travellers.
The Government will allocate RM25 million to the Malaysian
Healthcare Tourism Council (MHTC) to strengthen the position
of Malaysia as the preferred destination for health tourism in
ASEAN for oncology, cardiology and fertility treatment.
86. To date, e-visa applications are available for 10 countries,
including China and India. To facilitate the visa application process,
licensed travel agents under the Ministry of Tourism, Arts and
Culture (MoTAC) are allowed to submit group application for
up to 100 people per transaction through the eNTRI and eVISA
system.
SECOND THRUST: INVESTING IN MALAYSIANS - LEVELLING UP
HUMAN CAPITAL
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
87. Growth is necessary, but not sufficient to ensure Shared
Prosperity. Economic growth must see that all Malaysians can
participate meaningfully, and the fruits are shared equitably.
There are three interrelated challenges that we face now in our
labour market that need to be addressed.
88. Firstly, we are concerned with more than half a million
unemployed Malaysians in 2018, of which roughly 140,000 are
graduates. Additionally out of those unemployed, about 290,000
of them were youth up to 24 years old.
89. Secondly, the gender gap in our employment remains
sizeable despite making significant progress in the past few
years with the appointment of the first woman Deputy Prime
Minister, Chief Justice and Chief Commissioner of Malaysian Anti
Corruption Commission (MACC). Female labour force participation
rate continues to stagnate at around 55%, far from our target of
60%. A recent World Bank study concluded that if all barriers
against Malaysian women are removed and women’s participation
in our economy is increased, the country’s income per capita
could grow by 26.2%.
90. Thirdly, Malaysia has become overly dependent on lowskilled
labour, especially foreign workers. Cheap foreign labour
disincentivises companies from investing in more productive
capital and technology. As of end 2018, there were officially
2.2 million foreign workers, or 15% of the national labour force
of 15 million people. We must reverse the addiction to lowskilled
foreign labour, while recognising the many challenges
industries face in securing adequate workforce for their
industry.
Strategy 5: Enhancing Job Opportunities for Malaysians
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
Malaysians@Work
91. Recognising the key challenges we face, the Government
will be launching the Malaysians@Work initiative, aimed at
simultaneously creating better employment opportunities for
youth and women and reducing our over-dependence on lowskilled
foreign workers. Very simply, Malaysians@Work is divided
into four programmes directed at providing both wage incentives
for workers and hiring incentives for employers as follows:
First : Graduates@Work is designed specifically for the hiring
of graduates who have been unemployed for more than
12 months. The graduates who secures work will
receive a wage incentive of RM500 per month, for
a duration of two years, while employers receive a
hiring incentive up to RM300 per month for each
new hire, for two years;
Second : Women@Work seeks to create 33,000 job opportunities
per year for women who have stopped working for a
year or more, and are between 30-50 years-old. The
wage incentive for returning women workers is RM500
per month for two years, and a corresponding hiring
incentive for employers up to RM300 per month for
two years. On top of the above, the current income
tax exemption for women who return to work after
a career break be extended for another four years
until 2023;
Third : Locals@Work is a hiring cost equalisation programme,
aimed at incentivising the shift away from low-skilled
foreign workers dependency. The wage incentive for
Malaysians who are hired to replace foreign workers
is at either RM350 or RM500 per month, depending
on the sectors, for a duration of two years, and
corresponding hiring incentive for employers up to
RM250 per month for two years; and
Fourth : Apprentice@Work is a TVET incentive programme,
aimed at encouraging more youth to enter TVET
courses, in the form of additional RM100 per month
on existing allowance for trainees on apprenticeships.
The Government will also extend double tax deduction
on expenses incurred by companies participating in
Skim Latihan Dual Nasional (SLDN) for another two
years. In addition, the double tax deduction currently
given to companies undertaking Structured Internship
Programme (SIP) approved by Talent Corporation
Malaysia Berhad (TalentCorp) will be expanded to
include students from all academic fields rather
than just engineering and technology.
92. The Government believes that Malaysians@Work programme
will enable Malaysians who are unemployed to gain the necessary
skill sets and capabilities with on-the-job training, to ensure
continued employment with the relevant company, with the
retention rate expected to exceed 90% after the incentive ends in
two years. This will build human capital from the unemployed
to become a self-reliant worker, able to contribute productively
to the labour market.
93. Other than the Apprentice@Work programme, the
Malaysians@Work initiatives will be managed by the EPF, whereby
the wage incentives will be credited into their EPF account. This
initiative will subsequently integrated with the Employment
Insurance System (EIS) as well as other active labour market
programmes. The Government anticipates that the Malaysians@
Work initiative will cost RM6.5 billion over five years and create
an additional 350,000 jobs for Malaysians and reduce foreign
workers dependency by more than 130,000.
94. The Government will also be undertaking further measures
to improve the working environment for women and parents in
general. In year 2019, RM10 million was allocated for the development
early childhood care facilities in government buildings. Through
this, 66 new TASKAs were created in government facilities. The
Government will allocate an additional RM30 million in 2020
to provide more TASKAs, focusing especially on hospitals and
schools. In addition, to ease the financial burden of parents who
enrol their children in registered nurseries and kindergartens,
individual tax relief for fees paid will be increased from RM1,000
to RM2,000.
Strategy 6: Modernising the Labour Market
95. In addition to creating new employment opportunities, the
Government will also continuously pursue efforts to modernise
our labour market and enhance the employment conditions of
workers.
96. In order to remain relevant with the current needs of the
labour market, the Government will review the Employment Act
1955, which includes the following:
First : In order to increase maternity leave from 60 days
to 90 days effective 2021,
Second : Extend the eligibility to overtime from those earning
less RM2,000 to those earning less than RM4,000
per month;
Third : Improve protection and procedures for handling
sexual harassment complaints, and;
Fourth : Introduce new provisions on the prohibition of
discrimination on religion, ethnicity, and gender.
97. The Pakatan Harapan Government is committed to improve
livelihoods, particularly for lower income groups. The Government
had increased the minimum wage to RM1,100 per month effective
January 2019. In balancing the needs of employees and employers,
the Government takes cognisance of the higher cost of living in
major urban centres, the Government proposes to increase the
minimum wage rate only in major cities to RM1,200 per month
effective 2020.
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
Enhancing Social Protection
98. With the ever changing work environment, the existing
mechanism for social protection for workers will also need to
be enhanced. In this regard:
First : The Employees Provident Fund (EPF) will extend
coverage to contract workers, for those under Contract
for Services and Professionals. As a start, this will
be a voluntary scheme for workers in the arts and
entertainment industry via collaboration between
EPF and the National Film Development Corporation
Malaysia (FINAS) before extending the coverage to
other sectors; and
Second : The current Self-Employment Social Security Scheme
by the Social Security Organisation (SOCSO) will
be expanded to enable contributions by other selfemployed
groups across 18 key sectors, such as
fishermen, farmers, sole proprietors and partnerships.
99. SOCSO will build a new RM500 million rehabilitation
centre in Perak to mirror the success of the SOCSO Rehabilitation
Centre in Melaka. The new centre will be equipped with the
latest technology including robotics, trauma treatment and with a
centre of excellence for prevention of accidents, in collaboration
with relevant agencies.
i-Suri for Spouse
100. In 2019, the i-Suri programme received an allocation of
RM45 million where the Government topped-up on contribution made
by husbands to their housewives. In 2020, this programme will also
be expanded whereby husbands may voluntary elect to contribute 2%
from his 11% EPF employee contribution to his wife’s EPF Account.
101. The Government will also allocate RM20 million in 2020
to further extend the benefits under i-Suri via social safety
coverage under SOCSO.
Strategy 7: Investing in Education and Talent
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
102. The Government is committed to provide quality education
at different stages of life for the rakyat. Hence, MoE continues
to receive the largest allocation increasing from RM60.2 billion
in 2019 to RM64.1 billion in 2020. This reflects the commitment
by Government in investing in the future of our children.
Upgrading our Schools
103. The Government will continue to invest into building
new schools in line with demand as the population grows.
However, what has often happened in the past is the neglect of
the existing schools. Hence, to ensure that our existing schools
deliver a more conducive learning environment for our children,
the Government will increase the allocation for school maintenance
and upgrading works from RM652 million as announced in Budget
2019 to RM735 million in 2020, as follows:
• National Schools RM300 million
• National-type Chinese Schools RM50 million
• National-type Tamil Schools RM50 million
• Boarding Schools RM50 million
• MARA Junior Science Colleges RM50 million
• Government Aided Religious Schools RM50 million
• Missionary Schools RM50 million
• Tahfiz Schools RM50 million
• People’s Religious Schools & Private RM25 million
Religious Schools
• Registered Religious Pondok Schools RM25 million
• National-type Secondary Schools RM20 million
• Independent Chinese Secondary Schools RM15 million
104. To ensure a safe and comfortable learning environment,
the Government will focus on repairing dilapidated schools by
providing RM783 million in 2020, particularly for schools in
Sabah and Sarawak. The Government will construct in 2020
schools such as in Langkawi, Kulai, Hulu Langat, Putrajaya, Pasir
Gudang, Tumpat, Marang and Johor Bahru.
105. For National Schools, the Government will further allocate
RM23 million to ensure that these school facilities are disabled
friendly. This is in line with the ‘zero reject’ policy introduced
by the Ministry of Education, whereby no disabled child shall
be denied an education due to his or her disability.
106. The Government will also increase the amount of utility
assistance to include sewerage services, with an additional
allocation of RM12 million benefitting 2,000 government-aided
schools.
Mainstreaming TVET
107. Another key focus area of the Government’s human
capital development policy is the mainstreaming of the Technical
& Vocational Education & Training (TVET) programme. The
Government is increasing the allocation from RM5.7 billion in
2019 to RM5.9 billion in 2020 on TVET, including to:
First : Further strengthen the public and private sectors’
synergy on the TVET programme through increased
funding of the State Skills Development Centres
(SSDC). The Government will provide RM50 million
through Perbadanan Tabung Pembangunan Kemahiran
(PTPK) to fund TVET courses conducted by SSDCs;
Second : Promote greater industry collaboration by Public
Skills Training Institutions (ILKA) by:
• Allowing ILKAs to utilise surplus revenues generated
from TVET courses provided to the industry for
expenditures such as upgrading equipment and
hiring trainers from industry; and
• Providing matching grant fund of RM20 million
to support customised TVET courses undertaken
in collaboration with industries.
Third : The Government will expand pathways for TVET
graduates to pursue further studies and securing
jobs. The Malaysia Technical University Network
(MTUN) universities will offer degree courses for
trainees graduating from Vocational Colleges (Kolej
Vokasional) next year; and
Fourth : The Human Resource Development Fund (HRDF)
will collaborate with the industry to provide TVET
training linked to employment opportunities. For this
purpose, the Government will provide RM30 million
to train more than 3,000 youths from low income
households.
Professional Certifications
108. To encourage adult learning, the EPF will expand the
scope of its education withdrawal for qualifications attained at
certificate level, especially for accredited programmes that are
in line with the nation’s IR4.0 aspirations. The EPF is looking
to expand this withdrawal to include members’ parents and
spouse. In addition, the Government will allocate RM20 million
to be matched by another RM20 million from HRDF towards
encouraging working adults to undertake professional certification
examinations in fields relating to IR4.0.
MARA and Yayasan Peneraju
109. The Government will continue to emphasise learning
opportunities under MARA and Yayasan Peneraju Pendidikan
Bumiputera (Yayasan Peneraju). This is a targeted assistance by
MARA for low-income and rural bumiputeras through education
institutions such as Maktab Rendah Sains Mara, Kolej GIATMARA
and Universiti Kuala Lumpur (UniKL). The total allocation for
education institutions under MARA for 2020 amounts to RM1.3
billion, with a further RM2 billion allocated for student loans
benefitting 50,000 students. In addition, RM192 million is also
allocated for professional certification programmes under Yayasan
Peneraju.
THIRD THRUST: CREATING A UNITED, INCLUSIVE AND EQUITABLE
SOCIETY
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
110. A country can only be united if our economic development
is inclusive regardless of race, religion, geographical location
and background. The Federal Government strives to defend and
empower all inclusively and not only one group exclusively.
Strategy 8: Inclusive Development – RM10.9 Billion Allocated
for Rural Development
111. Despite recent improvements in income inequality in
Malaysia, the Government will continue to enhance efforts to
reduce income inequality in the country, particularly between
rural and urban areas. The Government will increase the allocation
for rural development projects from RM9.7 billion in 2019 to
RM10.9 billion in 2020.
Narrowing Inequality and the Rural-Urban Divide
112. This inclusive development strategy is to narrow the
urban-rural divide by expanding coverage of basic infrastructure
for rural areas, particularly for Sabah and Sarawak.
113. For 2020, approximately RM587 million will be allocated
for rural water projects, out of which RM470 million for Sabah
and Sarawak to meet our target of 99% access to clean water.
114. The Government will also spend RM500 million on rural
electrification benefiting more than 30,000 rural households,
with a majority of the beneficiaries living in Sabah and
Sarawak.
115. Another major developmental priority is on rural roads
with a total allocation of RM1 billion throughout Malaysia,
primarily targeted at Sabah and Sarawak. Rural road projects
in Sabah amount to RM326 million and Sarawak amounts to
RM224 million and will benefit 145,000 rural population.
116. The Government remains committed to complete the
Pan-Borneo Highway project, which is an important catalyst to
economic growth in Sabah and Sarawak. The savings from the
on-going cost rationalisation to date is RM1.2 billion, reducing
the project cost to RM29 billion. What is saved now will allow
us to plan for even more projects to spur economic growth,
including in Sabah and Sarawak, such as the 165 kilometres
Trans-Borneo Highway connecting Sabah and Sarawak to Eastern
Kalimantan. An important component of this project is the
package worth RM600 million for the 40 km Jalan Kalabakan-
Serudong and the construction of the Customs, Immigration,
Quarantine and Security Complex (CIQS) and government housing
quarters.
117. In 2018, Sabah and Sarawak were the highest recipients
of Federal Government financial grants to states amounting to
RM1.14 billion and RM1.30 billion respectively. For 2020, Sabah
and Sarawak will receive the largest portion of Development
Expenditures amounting to RM5.2 billion and RM4.4 billion
respectively. Overall, these allocations demonstrate that the
Pakatan Harapan government prioritises the needs of Sabah and
Sarawak. In the same spirit, the Federal Government intends to
increase the financial grants disbursed to Sabah and Sarawak
as provided for under the current Malaysia Agreement 1963.
118. Included in the federal grants is the Special Grant under
Section 112D of the Federal Constitution, which has not been
reviewed and remained unchanged since 1969. The rate set by
the previous government was RM26.7 million for Sabah and
RM16 million for Sarawak per annum. For the first time, the
Government proposes to increase the rate, doubling it for 2020 to
RM53.4 million for Sabah and RM32 million for Sarawak.
The Government plans to double the rate again to RM106.8
million to Sabah and RM64 million for Sarawak within five
years.
119. A total of RM4.85 billion is also provided under the MARRIS
fund from the Federal to all state governments to maintain
roads. The existing guidelines do not allow for MARRIS funds
to be used for repair and upgrading works. To provide greater
flexibility, state governments will be allowed to upgrade roads,
slopes, bridges and drains utilising up to 15% or RM20 million
from MARRIS funds allocated to each state, whichever is lower.
120. To ensure that rural communities, especially in Sabah and
Sarawak are able to obtain necessities including LPG and petrol
at reasonable prices, the Government is allocating RM170 million
toward subsidising the cost of transportation and distribution
for basic goods to rural areas.
Subsidies Increased to RM24.2 billion
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
121. The allocation for total subsidies and social assistance
will be increased from RM22.3 billion in 2019 to RM24.2 billion
in 2020, including welfare assistance such as Bantuan Sara
Hidup and subsidy payments such as agriculture related, fuel
and interest subsidies.
Bantuan Sara Hidup
122. In 2019, the Bantuan Sara Hidup (BSH) scheme has
benefitted 3.9 million households. Next year, the Government
will allocate RM5 billion for BSH and expand the scheme to cover
1.1 million single individuals aged above 40 years old who are
earning less than RM2,000 per month. In addition, all disabled
persons aged 18 years old and above, with an income less than
RM2,000 per month will also be covered. They will be entitled
to receive BSH payment of RM300, and qualify automatically as
a recipient of the free MySalam Takaful Scheme.
Social Enterprise and Community Development
123. The Government will continue to support welfare agencies
and non-governmental organisations in their activities, including
but not limited to:
First : RM575 million socio-economic assistance to senior
citizens benefiting 137,000 seniors whose household
income is below the poverty level. We have also
allocated RM4.6 million to the Senior Citizens Activity
Centre (PAWE) to cover the expenditure of 129 centres
across Malaysia benefiting 37,000 senior citizens;
Second : An allocation of RM80 million towards upgrading,
repair and maintenance of 67 various institutions
under the Department of Social Welfare (JKM) including
child care, disabled and elderly centres;
Third : An allocation of RM25 million for the management,
administration and expansion of the Food Bank program
throughout Malaysia, an initiative to redistribute an
estimated 3,000 metric tonne of excess food that is
donated daily to the needy target groups, especially
B40;
Fourth : An allocation of RM20 million for five new Independent
Learning Centres, Down Syndrome training and TASKA
for disabled. In addition, all training and coaching
services provided by training service provider to the
disabled persons will be exempted from service tax;
Fifth : RM15 million allocation to the National Anti-Drugs
Agency’s pilot RINTIS program on drug addict
rehabilitation with Non-Governmental Organisations
(NGOs) and local communities; and
Sixth : An allocation of RM4.5 million to Anjung Singgah
for the year 2020, which will benefit about 7,000
homeless Malaysians.
124. During the 16th Agong Coronation, our beloved Duli Yang
Maha Mulia Seri Paduka Baginda Raja Permaisuri Agong, had worn
the Kain Tenun Pahang DiRaja made by inmates from Penor and
Bentong Prison with pride. In view of this, the Government will
allocate RM20 million to expand skills training and programmes
that meet the national TVET standard for inmates in areas such
as food & beverage, carpentry, laundromat and metal works.
125. To support the growth of social enterprises, which help to
improve the socio-economy of local communities, the Government
will provide RM10 million to Malaysian Global Innovation &
Creativity Centre (MaGIC) to support such enterprises.
126. The Government will also allocate an additional RM10
million to MyCIF specifically for social enterprises to fundraise
via P2P Financing platforms, where MyCIF will co-invest with
private investors on a one-to-one basis, by providing financing
at affordable rates for Social Enterprises.
127. To further encourage the private sector to donate as part
of their corporate social responsibility, effective 5 September 2019,
the Government has increased the donation reporting threshold
from RM5,000 to RM10,000 under subsection 44(6) of the Income
Tax Act 1967. This will subsequently be increased to RM20,000
beginning 2020.
128. To inculcate philanthropy, tax deduction on donation for
charitable and sports activities and projects of national interest
currently capped at 7% from the aggregate income for taxpayer
other than company will be increased to 10% in line with the
threshold given to companies. The tax deduction is also expanded
to:
First : Cash wakaf contribution to state religious authorities
or a body established by state religious authorities
to administer wakaf;
Second : Cash wakaf contribution to public universities
approved by the state religious authorities to receive
wakaf; and
Third : Cash endowment contribution to public universities.
129. Currently, income tax exemptions is given for all income
received by religious institution or organisation established for the
purpose of religious worship or the advancement of religion and
registered under the Registrar of Societies Malaysia. Beginning 2020,
similar tax exemption will be extended to religious institution
or organisation registered as a Company Limited By Guarantee
with the Companies Commission of Malaysia.
130. Department of Orang Asli Development (JAKOA) will be
allocated RM57 million to provide and improve the welfare and
assistance of Orang Asli. In addition, another RM83 million is
also allocated for overall economic development, education and
infrastructure of the Orang Asli.
131. The Government remains sensitive to the difficulties and
specific challenges faced by segments of the Indian community.
Therefore, the Government will once again allocate a grant of
RM100 million to Malaysian Indian Transformation Unit (MITRA)
for Budget 2020 of which 80% will be programme-based not
organisation specific to strengthen initiatives targeted at improving
the socio-economic situation, skills development, health, education
and women empowerment of this community.
132. To support the development and repair of basic infrastructure
in new villages, the Government will continue to provide
RM85 million in 2020.
Bumiputera Agenda
133. In last year’s 2019 Budget, a total of RM7.6 billion was
allocated to assist the Bumiputera institutions and entrepreneurs.
This total has been increased in 2020 to RM8.0 billion, including
the following:
First : RM6.6 billion provided for Bumiputera institutions
focused on education such as Majlis Amanah Rakyat
(MARA), Universiti Teknologi Mara (UiTM) and Yayasan
Peneraju Pendidikan Bumiputera;
Second : RM1 billion of financing for Bumiputera SMEs such
as through SJPP and SME Bank; and
Third : RM445 million provided for entrepreneurship
programmes mainly under SMECorp, Pelaburan
Hartanah, PUNB, TEKUN and TERAJU.
134. Year to date until August 2019, Bumiputera companies
have successfully secured new projects via tender valued at
more than RM3.6 billion worth of contracts awarded by the
Government in 2019. In 2020, the Government will continue to
ensure at least 30% of tenders of each Ministry are reserved for
only Bumiputera contractors.
Upholding Islam
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
135. The Government will continue to uphold the Federal
Constitutional position of Islam as the religion of the Federation.
The allocation for Islamic affairs under the Prime Minister’s
Department will be increased to RM1.3 billion in the 2020 Budget,
from RM1.2 billion this year.
136. We will increase the allowance to Al-Quran dan Fardu
Ain class (KAFA) Teachers by RM100 a month to 33,200 existing
KAFA teachers with an additional cost of RM46 million.
137. In appreciation for their role in the community, the
Government proposes a one-off special bonus of RM500 for each
Imam, Bilal (Muezzin), Tok Siak/Noja/Merbot (mosque caretakers)
and Guru Takmir.
138. The Government will allocate for Rahmatan Lil-Alamin a
sum of RM10 million to the Department of Islamic Development
Malaysia (JAKIM) to develop a greater understanding of
Maqasid Shariah via a series of advocacy programmes and
deliberations.
Strategy 9: Towards Better Health Services
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
139. The Government remains committed to ensure access to
quality healthcare for all, as part of its aspiration of creating an
inclusive Malaysian society. We will allocate resources to intensify
preventive measures to manage the burden on public healthcare
expenses. For Budget 2020, a total of RM30.6 billion as compared
to RM28.7 billion under Belanjawan 2019 will be allocated to the
Ministry of Health for healthcare services, including:
First : RM1.6 billion for the construction of new hospitals
as well as upgrading and expansion of existing ones.
These include Tengku Ampuan Rahimah Hospital in
Klang, Kampar Hospital and Labuan Hospital. The
expansion includes expanding cardiology centres
at existing hospitals such as Queen Elizabeth II
hospital in Sabah;
Second : RM319 million for the construction and upgrading of
health and dental clinics, as well as quarters facility.
The new clinics will be built in Setiu, Sungai Petani
and Cameron Highlands as well as Kudat and Tawau
in Sabah; and Long San and Simpang Simunjan in
Sarawak;
Third : In line with the principle of 3R culture, Repair –
Replace – and Restore, a total of RM227 million will
be provided to upgrade medical equipment while
RM95 million for renovation of medical infrastructure
and facilities such as at Pontian Hospital;
Fourth : An initial allocation of RM60 million will be provided
to kick-start the pneumococcal vaccination for children,
as promised in the Pakatan Harapan manifesto;
Budget 2020 39
Fifth : RM59 million will be allocated in collaboration with
NGO medical ambulance services to acquire more
ambulances, to ensure a more responsive emergency
and trauma services;
Sixth : RM31 million is allocated for upgrading and
maintenance of ICT services which will include a
pilot project for hospital electronic medical records;
and
Seventh : RM5 million to provide mobile clinics in rural areas,
especially Orang Asli in line with the Sustainable
Development Goals of achieving universal health
coverage.
Expansion of MySalam & PEKA B40
140. MySalam was a new social protection scheme introduced
by the Pakatan Harapan government this year which provided 4.3
million individuals with takaful coverage in the event of a critical
illness and hospitalisation. For those diagnosed this year with
a critical illness, they will receive RM8,000 cash payout, while
those who are warded at Government hospitals can claim RM50
income replacement each day for up to 14 days. All household
recipients of Bantuan Sara Hidup (BSH) aged between 18 and 55
years old are automatically covered for free.
141. Starting 1 January 2020, the coverage will be extended
to:
First : Cover 45 illnesses from the existing 36, including
polio and terminal illness;
Second : Those aged up to 65 years old, compared to the
current 55 years old, benefiting an additional 1.5
million individuals; and
Third : Those with gross annual income up to RM100,000.
They will receive critical illness pay out of RM4,000
and RM50 daily hospitalisation income replacement
for up to 14 days when diagnosed and warded at
Government hospitals. This will benefit an additional
up to five million Malaysians.
142. The Government has also launched the Skim Peduli
Kesihatan (PeKA) B40 to provide screenings and early intervention
for non-communicable diseases such as mental health and
cancer for those aged between 50 and 60 years old. A total of
100,000 have benefited from this initiative and the Government
will expand its coverage to those aged 40 and above.
Fertility Incentive
143. Today, the fertility rate in Malaysia has fallen alarmingly
from 4.9 children per woman in the 1970s to 1.9 children per
woman, which is below replacement level. Therefore, to assist
couples seeking fertility treatment, EPF will introduce a new
category of withdrawals, allowing for fertility treatment such as
in-vitro fertilisation (IVF) procedure. Additionally, the income tax
relief of up to RM6,000 given on expenses incurred for medical
treatment of serious illnesses will be expanded to include
expenses incurred on fertility treatment.
Private Retirement Schemes (PRS)
144. The Private Retirement Schemes (PRS) offer a complementary
channel for Malaysians to save especially for those not subjected
to any mandatory retirement savings scheme. Government will
allow for pre-retirement withdrawals for the Private Retirement
Schemes for the purposes of healthcare and housing with the
same terms and conditions as that allowed by EPF and not
subject to any penalty for early withdrawal.
Strategy 10: Enhancing the Transportation Ecosystem
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
145. This Government is committed to enhance the mobility
of Malaysians by reducing transport costs and improving
infrastructures
Prioritising Public Transport
146. In January 2019, the government introduced My50 and
My100 monthly travel passes providing unlimited travel on all rail
and bus services under RapidKL. The scheme has since benefitted
more than 120,000 public transport users. Subsequently, the
Government launched Pas Mutiara for RM50 in Pulau Pinang,
providing unlimited travel in a month on Rapid buses and Rapid
Ferry.
147. To demonstrate our commitment to improve public
transport as well as to nurture cleaner and greener cities, the
Government intends to invests RM450 million to acquire up to
500 electric buses of various sizes for public transport in selected
cities nationwide.
148. The Government will further support last-mile connectivity
in rural and urban areas by subsidising the bus operators with
an allocation of RM146 million in 2020.
149. The Government will be upgrading the rail tracks from
Gorge Line between Halogilat Station to Tenom Station in Sabah
at a cost of RM50 million. This will enhance traveling convenience
for locals while providing a memorable experience for tourists.
Sultan Azlan Shah Airport, Ipoh
150. The Government plans to upgrade the Sultan Azlan Shah
Airport in Ipoh including an extension of its runway. Towards
this, the Government will invite proposals on public private
partnership basis to realise this investment.
42 Budget 2020
Easing Johor Causeway
151. Another pressing issue the Government seeks to address
is improving the congestion problem at Johor Causeway, whereby
over 300,000 Malaysians commute daily to Singapore. To better
ease congestion at the Causeway and 2nd Link, the Government
will invest RM85 million beginning 2020 towards enhancing
vehicle and traffic flow through the Customs, Immigration and
Quarantine Complex (CIQ). An additional 50 counters will be
opened for motorcyclists and with streamlining of immigration
and PLUS counters. As part of a longer term solution to address
the congestion, the Government intends to proceed with the
Rapid Transit System (RTS) between Johor Bahru and Singapore.
Reducing Highway Toll Burden
152. In the Pakatan Harapan Manifesto, it has been stated
that negotiations will be undertaken to obtain the best price in
taking over every toll concession with the end goal of abolishing
toll collection gradually.
153. The Cabinet will consider all proposals, including those
from Khazanah Nasional Berhad (Khazanah), to acquire or dispose
all shares of PLUS Malaysia Berhad. There will be a minimum
reduction of average toll charges by 18% discount across all
PLUS highways. Such proposals must be fiscal positive without
increasing the present debt burden or the debt services charges
of the Government. At the same time, the 18% discount on Toll
Charges for the North South Highway will save highway users up to
RM1,130 million in 2020, and RM43 billion over the entire
concession period until 2038.
154. In addition, the Cabinet has approved the proposed offer
to acquire 4 Klang Valley highways – Shah Alam Expressway
(KESAS), Damansara-Puchong Expressway (LDP), Sprint Expressway
(SPRINT) and SMART Tunnel (SMART) to be funded via Governmentguaranteed
borrowings. With the introduction of congestion
charges that will be lowered by up to 30% of the present toll
rates during near peak and normal hours and free during
off-peak hours, this will provide a savings to the highway users
nearly RM180 million a year, or RM2 billion over the respective
concession periods. There will be no extension of the existing
concession and will end according to the existing concession contract.
155. The acquisition of these highways will not burden the
Government because the financing, operations and maintenance
cost will be entirely funded by the collection of toll and congestion
charges without requiring any future funding by the Government.
Clearly, this Government rejects the previous Government’s policy
of privatising profits and socialising losses.
156. During Belanjawan 2019, the Government abolished the
toll for motorcycles for the First and Second Penang Bridge.
Towards aligning the toll rates between the First and Second
Penang Bridge, effective 1 January 2020, the toll rates for private
cars at the Second Penang Bridge will be reduced from RM8.50
to RM7.00.
Targeted Fuel Subsidy
157. The fuel Targeted Subsidy Programme (PSP) was part of
the Pakatan Harapan promise. Individuals who own not more
than two cars and two motorcycles are eligible to receive PSP
for one vehicle.
158. The qualifying criteria for the vehicle are:
• A passenger car with 1,600cc engine capacity and below; or
• Any car above 1,600cc must be more than 10 years old; or
• Whereas, a qualified motorcycle must be 150cc and below;
or
• Any motorcycles above 150cc must be more than seven years
old.
All luxury vehicles will not be qualified to receive the targeted
subsidies.
159. Starting January 2020, PSP will be launched in Peninsular
Malaysia with two eligible categories as follows:
First : For eligible recipients of the BSH, the petrol subsidy
receivable will be RM30 per month for car owners
and RM12 per month for motorcycle owners. This
subsidy will be in the form of cash transfer, deposited
into the recipient’s bank account every four months.
The first payment will be made in April 2020 for
the period January to April 2020; and
Second : For all other motorists who are not BSH recipients,
they will receive a special Kad95 which allows them
to enjoy the fuel subsidy at a discount of 30 sen per
litre limited to 100 litres per month for cars or 40
litres per month for motorcycles. The Kad95 will be
implemented progressively during the first quarter
of 2020.
160. Upon commencement of the fuel subsidy scheme, RON95
and diesel retail prices will be gradually floated. This will
reduce leakages and cross-border smuggling of subsidised fuel
which is estimated to result in large losses to the Government.
The fuel subsidy will kick-in whenever the RON95 market
price determined by the Automatic Pricing Mechanism (APM)
is above RM2.08 per litre but no fuel subsidy will be given
when the market-determined APM price falls below RM2.08
per litre.
161. The Government will allocate RM2.2 billion for the proposed
scheme which will benefit more than eight million motorists.
Motorists in Sabah and Sarawak will continue to enjoy a fuel
price ceiling of RM2.08 per litre for RON95 and RM2.18 per litre
for diesel. Should the Sabah or Sarawak State Government would
like to participate in the PSP, the Federal Government is ready
to accept the request.
Strategy 11: Promoting Access to Housing
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
Fund for Affordable Homes
162. Bank Negara Malaysia launched a Fund for Affordable
Home earlier in January 2019 to help home buyers from the
lower-income group to purchase their first homes, for property
priced up to RM150,000 at a concessionary interest rate up to
3.5%. The qualifying criteria was expanded on 1 September 2019
to include property priced up to RM300,000 for households with
maximum income of RM4,360, being the threshold income for B40.
As of September 2019, 2,840 applications amounting to RM472.7
million have been received. The approval rate is 77.9%, with 982
applications amounting to RM156.2 million being approved.
163. In partnership with the private sector, the Government
has launched the Home Ownership Campaign where developers
providing at least a 10% discount for qualified properties will
be matched with stamp duty exemptions. As many as 21,000
property units valued at RM13.44 billion under the Home
Ownership Campaign have been successfully sold, exceeding the
RM3 billion initial sales target. The Campaign deadline has been
extended by 6 months from 30 June 2019 to 31 December 2019.
164. To address those who are unable to afford the initial
10% deposit and access to financing in purchasing their homes,
the Government will collaborate with financial institution in
introducing Rent To Own (RTO) financing scheme. Through this
scheme, financing of up to RM10 billion will be provided by the
financial institutions with the support from the Government via
a 30% or RM3 billion guarantee. This RTO scheme is for purchase
of first home up to RM500,000 property price. Under this scheme,
the applicant will rent the property for up to 5 years and after the
first year, the tenant will have the option to purchase the house
based on the price fixed at the time the tenancy agreement is
signed. The government will provide stamp duty exemptions on
the instruments of transfer between the developer and financial
institution, and between financial institutions and the buyer in
this scheme.
165. To reduce supply overhang of condominiums and
apartments amounting to RM8.3 billion in the second quarter of
2019, the Government proposes to lower the threshold on high
rise property prices in urban areas for foreign ownership from
RM1 million to RM600,000 in 2020.
166. To assist the Youth in purchasing their first home, the
Government will extend the Youth Housing Scheme administered by
Bank Simpanan Nasional from 1 January 2020 until 31 December
2021. The scheme also offers a 10 percent loan guarantee through
Cagamas to enable borrowers of full financing and RM200 monthly
instalment assistance for the first two years limited to 10,000
home units.
167. In response to the public view regarding the Real Property
Gain Tax (RPGT) imposed on disposal of properties by Malaysian
citizens and permanent residents after five years onwards, the
Government will improve RPGT treatment by revising the base
year for asset acquisition at 1 January 2013 for asset acquired
before 1 January 2013 as compared to the previous base year
of 1 January 2000.
Maintenance of Low and Medium Cost Strata Housing
168. The Government is concerned about the state of low
and medium cost strata housing. For 2020, the Government will
allocate RM100 million in 2020 for the repair and refurbishment
of these housing, to ensure lifts, electrical wiring, sanitary pipes
and roofing are safe and in good working order.
169. In collaboration with local authorities, the Government will
allocate RM15 million to the Safe City Initiative (Bandar Selamat)
to provide outdoor lighting, parking with security features for
motorcycles, anti-climb fences, and safety advocacy programmes.
Strategy 12: Unity Through Sports
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
170. Sports can unite the Rakyat. the Government will allocate
the following budget for our sports agenda:
First : RM299 million to implement the Sports For All
program, including rehabilitating and upgrading of
overall sports facilities, Youth & Sports Complexes
and Community Sports Complexes throughout the
country;
Second : RM179 million for our preparation in international
sporting events such as the Tokyo Olympics 2020
and Hanoi Sea Games 2021 which includes the
development of paralympic athletes; and
Third : RM45 million for the National Football Development
Programme, compared to the RM15 million in last
year’s 2019 Budget.
171. The sportswomen in our country such as Datuk Nicol
Ann David, Pandelela Rinong and Farah Ann Abdul Hadi have
succeeded at the highest levels and made Malaysians proud.
Therefore, the Government will allocate RM10 million next
year to further promote women in sports and nurture the next
generation of world class sportswomen.
172. The Government will continue to intensify youth
development programs with an allocation of RM138 million for
the Youth Power Club (YPC), Malaysia Future Leaders School
(MFLS) and volunteerism initiatives.
Strategy 13: Promoting Environmental Sustainability
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
173. The recent incidents at Sungai Kim Kim and Pasir Gudang,
as well as the spread of hazardous transboundary haze are painful
reminders of the importance of protecting our environment, and
the cost of greed. A total of RM30 million is allocated to raise
the capability and capacity of the Department of Environment
and Department of Chemistry to tackle this problem.
174. To mitigate the occurrence of flash floods and the damage
they may cause, the Government will allocate RM443.9 million
towards flood mitigation projects and RM150 million towards
the maintenance of existing flood retention ponds.
175. Additionally, to assist farmers in their time of need, the
Government will establish a RM100 million Disaster Assistance
Fund to provide loans at an interest rate of 4%.
Preserve Our Forests
176. The Government will allocate RM48 million to preserve
Malaysia’s pristine forests and natural biodiversity. Of this
allocation, RM10 million will be utilised as a matching grant
against private sector contributions towards conservation and
biodiversity initiatives. These efforts include supporting the
Central Forest Spine and Heart of Borneo initiatives, in addition
to rehabilitate and restore degraded forests.
177. There are fewer than 200 Malayan tigers left in the wild,
and it is estimated there are about 11,000 orangutans in Malaysia.
To support the efforts of the protecting these endangered animals,
the Government will allocate RM 15 million to the Malaysian
Conservation Alliance for Tigers (MyCat) and Sepilok Orangutan
Rehabilitation Centre and other NGOs.
178. To protect our flora and fauna better, RM20 million will
be provided to employ more forest rangers among retired soldiers
and local Orang Asli communities who know their lands the
best.
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)
179. The Government will allocate RM10 million towards
a joint Government-UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)
fund to co-finance SDG initiatives in Malaysia. In addition, the
Government will allocate RM5 million to support the convening
of Parliamentary Select Committee meetings and also for greater
engagement by Members of Parliament with civil society, including
to address the Sustainable Development Goals at the local level.
Defence and Public Security
180. To safeguard national safety, the allocation to the Ministry
of Home Affairs will be strengthened from RM15.6 billion in 2019
to RM16.9 billion in 2020.
181. In the defence of our nation’s sovereignty, the Government
will increase the allocation to the Ministry of Defence from
RM13.9 billion in 2019 to RM15.6 billion in 2020. The key focus
going forward will be to enhance defence readiness, such as
by improving the Armed Forces mobility. Enhanced readiness
includes meeting the changing nature of threats, such as having
Fast Interceptor crafts for safeguarding the waters of Sabah.
FOURTH THRUST: REVITALISATION OF PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS
AND FINANCES
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
182. The YAB Prime Minister’s Vision 2020 of Malaysia becoming
a high-income nation was derailed due to the shameless turning
of Malaysia into a global kleptocracy and involved a total of over
RM150 billion.
183. The Government is committed to paying off all borrowings
and obligations inherited from the previous regime. For the year 2019,
the Government is paying RM2.4 billion to service the debt interest
in 2019 and RM2.7 billion in 2020 for 1MDB and SRC International.
50 Budget 2020
We would like to express our utmost appreciation to the people
of Malaysia who have generously contributed RM203 million
towards Tabung Harapan Malaysia, which is utilised for the
above repayments.
184. As of July 2019, approximately RM1.45 billion has been
returned by international authorities, including the proceeds
from the sale of the mega-yacht Equanimity. The Malaysian
government will continue to leave no stone unturned in our
attempt to recover the stolen funds and assets from around the
world. This includes pursuing Goldman Sachs as well as their
17 directors.
185. The Government was successful in reducing our overall
debt and liabilities ratio to GDP from 79.3% in 2017 to 75.4%
in 2018. However the figure is expected to rise to 77.1% as at
end June 2019. To a large extent, this is due to the increase in
the committed Government guarantee for the continuation of
the Mass Rapid Transit 2 (MRT 2) and Pan Borneo infrastructure
projects, as well as the RM20 billion bailout of Tabung Haji, or
1.3% of the GDP.
186. In fact, our total debt and liabilities would have grown
bigger if not for the fact that we have rationalised various mega
projects, such as the Light Rapid Transit 3 (LRT3), MRT2 and
East Coast Rail Link (ECRL). The Government saved at least RM46
billion in capital expenditure.
187. We are pleased with the trust which has been built
by YAB Prime Minister with the Japanese Government via the
Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) has once again
offered to guarantee an additional tranche of Samurai bond with
an even lower interest rate of less than 0.5%, compared to the
previous rate of 0.63%. The Federal Government intends to issue
the Samurai Bonds early next year where the issuance size will
be determined after further discussions with JBIC.
Strategy 14: Commitment to Fiscal Consolidation
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
188. Despite the burden of servicing the nearly RM1.1 trillion
of debt and liabilities inherited from the previous administration,
this Government remains committed to gradual fiscal consolidation.
The Government recorded a fiscal deficit of 3.7% of GDP in 2018
and is on track to achieve the targeted deficit of 3.4% in 2019.
189. In the previous Budget, we had announced a fiscal deficit
target of 3.0% for 2020. However, a heightened risk of a global
economic slowdown and the unanticipated expenditure needed
to rescue troubled institutions inherited from the previous
administration requires pre-emptive fiscal measures. To sustain
economic growth, the Government will be adopting a mildly
expansionary budget, with a revised target of 3.2% fiscal deficit
in 2020. We expect the fiscal deficit to reduce further on average
at 2.8% GDP over the medium term.
190. The 2020 Budget will allocate a total expenditure of RM297
billion, excluding contingency reserve of RM2 billion, which is
an increase of RM19.5 billion compared to RM277.5 billion in
2019, after excluding the one-off allocation for outstanding GST
and income tax refunds. The 2020 Budget comprises Operating
Expenditure of RM241 billion and Development Expenditure of
RM56 billion.
Enhancing Government Revenue
191. The Government expects to collect RM244.5 billion in
revenue in 2020, an increase of RM11.2 billion from 2019, after
excluding the one-off PETRONAS special dividend of RM30 billion.
192. Despite the healthy increase in tax revenue, we collect
significantly lower taxes than some other countries. For 2017,
Malaysia’s tax revenue relative to GDP is only 13.1%, while
countries such as Viet Nam, Chile, Poland and South Korea
collect 19.0%, 17.4%, 16.8% and 15.4% respectively.
193. To ensure a more progressive personal income tax structure,
it is proposed that a new band for chargeable income in excess
of RM2 million will be introduced and taxed at 30%, which is a
2 percentage point increase from the current 28% rate. This
increase will only affect approximately 2,000 high income earners
in the country.
194. The SME income tax rate was reduced by 1% to 17% in
2019. To further support the growth of the SME, the chargeable
income subjected to 17% rate will be increased to RM600,000,
subject to the SME having paid-up capital of not more than
RM2.5 million and annual sales of not more than RM50 million.
195. As at end-September 2019, the Government has managed
to repay GST refunds amounting to RM15.9 billion to more than
78,000 companies and income tax refunds amounting to RM13.6
billion have been returned to 448,000 companies and 184,000
taxpayers. The Pakatan Harapan Government has fulfilled our
promise to the rakyat to refund a significant portion of the RM37
billion of the taxes which were unjustly withheld from them for
the past five years by the previous regime.
196. To improve efficiency of management of taxpayer appeals,
the Government will merge the Special Commissioner of Income
Tax and Customs Appeal Tribunal into the Tax Appeal Tribunal.
Through this merger, taxpayers who are dissatisfied with the
decision of the Director General of the IRB or the Director General
of RMCD may submit a tax-related appeal under all applicable
tax laws to the Tax Appeal Tribunal beginning 2021.
197. As announced in the previous Budget, the Digital Services
Tax will be implemented with effect from 1 January 2020, to
include services such as, to downloaded software, music, video
or digital advertising. Foreign service providers can commence
registration with the Customs beginning 1 October 2019.
198. Beginning January 2021, the Government will introduce
a Tax Identification Number or TIN for business or individual
income earners aged 18 and above. In order to implement
this initiative, engagement sessions with all stakeholders will
commence next year. This initiative will be introduced in 2021.
199. In order to strengthen enforcement and to reduce leakages
from smuggling through containerised cargo and wrongful
declaration for customs duties the government will allocate
RM235 million to purchase 20 additional cargo scanners to be
placed at all our strategic ports of entry.
200. To curb illegal gambling, the Government will propose
a higher minimum mandatory penalty of RM100,000 for illegal
gamblers, along with a minimum mandatory jail sentence of
6 months. For illegal operators, a higher minimum mandatory
penalty of RM1 million and a 12 month minimum mandatory jail
sentence will be imposed. Commencing 2020, the total number
of special draws for Numbers Forecast Operator (NFO) will be
reduced from 11 to eight times a year.
201. The Government will dispose assets which were approved
via direct negotiation previously through competitive bidding
process in order to realise the full potential of these assets. This
is expected to generate revenue of more than RM3 billion in 2020.
202. The Government has decided to proceed with the Bandar
Malaysia Project which involves 486 acres at Sungai Besi, Kuala
Lumpur having negotiated better terms for the Government. The
project will now include a People’s Park, with an additional 5,000
units of affordable homes and greater Bumiputera participation
throughout the project. The proceeds from the project will be
valued and announced in due course, and will be utilised to
reduce the debts of 1MDB.
Rationalising Government Expenditure
203. As an example of how the Government will continue to
innovate to optimise expenditure, the Government will centralise
and combine the tender and procurement of RM500 million worth
of medicine across the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Defence
and University Hospitals to generate savings from bulk purchase.
204. The previous administration had often been criticised for
continuously building new infrastructure and buildings without
providing sufficient funds to maintain existing assets resulting
in their deplorable condition. While decades of neglect cannot be
remedied overnight, this Government will now focus on 3R (Repair,
Replace, and Restore). The operating expenditure allocation for
maintenance and repair of existing public assets will increase
from RM6.3 billion in 2019 to RM10.5 billion in 2020.
Local Content Procurement Policy
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
205. Buy Made in Malaysia product campaigns will be intensified.
To support our local medical device industry, the Government will
introduce an initiative to encourage local producers to upgrade
equipment and tools used in public clinics and hospitals, based
on a minimum allocation of 30%.
206. We are expanding opportunities for many more Bumiputera
contractors to participate in government procurement. Hence, the
Government has reopened the registration for Bumiputera Gred 1
Contractor (G1) beginning 1 September 2019. As of end-September
2019, a total of 946 applications have been received. Existing and
new registered contractors will get to bid for government jobs
worth RM1.3 billion, dedicated solely for Bumiputera contractors.
Strategy 15: Strengthening Institutions, Governance & Integrity
Tan Sri Speaker Sir,
207. The Government has launched National Anti-Corruption
Plan (NACP) on 29 January 2019. To date, a total of 115 initiatives
have been introduced of which 15% of the NACP initiatives have
been completed, with another 78% of measures in progress.
Notable achievements include disclosure of assets by the YAB
Prime Minister, all Ministers, Deputy Ministers and Members of
Parliament.
208. The Government is committed to increase the level
of governance and service delivery in line with Competency,
Accountability and Transparency (CAT). In this regard, additional
100 personnel will be made available to MACC in 2020. In
addition, the Government will strengthen the integrity unit in
all ministries with an allocation of RM10 million to undertake
Risk Assessment Tests in all ministries, departments and
agencies.
209. The Government will implement much needed reforms,
which includes establishing laws and institutions such as:
First : The Independent Police Complaints and Misconduct
Commission (IPCMC) to raise public confidence in
our Royal Malaysian Police Force (PDRM); and
Second : Establish the Malaysian Ombudsman to replace the
Bureau of Public Complaints to enhance governance
and delivery systems of the Government.
210. This Government is duly concerned with custodial deaths
and alleged mistreatment of suspects. Hence, the Government will
allocate RM50 million through National Centre for Governance,
Integrity and Anti-Corruption (GIACC) to enhance detention
procedures and facilities, in particular the installation of 11,500
units of Closed-Circuit Televisions (CCTV) in police detention
centres and immigration entry points.
Uplifting the Public Service
211. The civil service represents the backbone to the Government.
There are 1.6 million people dedicating their career in delivering
public service to the rakyat. Hence, we intend to improve some
of the terms of their remuneration as follows:
First : The Cost of Living Allowance (COLA) will be increased
by RM50 per month for support group, with an
additional allocation of RM350 million annually; and
Second : Civil servants will be allowed early redemption of
Accumulated Leaves (Gantian Cuti Rehat) for up to
75 days as replacement pay, for those who have at
least 15 years of service; and
Third : The Public Sector Home Financing Board (LPPSA) will
offer new borrowers free Group Personal Accident
Insurance coverage worth of RM100,000 for two
years.
212. In addition, to help relieve the burden of dependants
to civil servants who have died in service, the Government will
improve the current benefits as follows:
First : Introduce an Ex-Gratia Death Benefit of up to
RM150,000 payable to dependants of the deceased;
and
Second : The Annual Salary Movement (PGT) is brought
forward for civil servants who have died in service
before the Salary Movement Date (TPG).
213. The People’s Volunteer Corps or RELA will enjoy higher
allowance of RM2 per hour beginning from 1 January 2020,
resulting in an additional allocation of RM26 million.
214. In recognition of the service that received the grace of
Kebawah Duli Yang Maha Mulia Seri Paduka Yang Di Pertuan
Agong, all personnel of the Fire and Rescue Department of
Malaysia will receive a special allowance of RM200 a month, with
an allocation of RM35 million. This will benefit 14,400 personnel.
215. The Government values the sacrifice and heroism of our
armed forces, particularly holders of the Pingat Jasa Malaysia.
Hence, the Government will accord a one-off payment of RM500 to
the 70,000 holders of the Pingat Jasa Malaysia, with an allocation
of RM35 million.
216. In line with the Repair, Replace, and Restore (3R) philosophy,
the Government will allocate RM330 million to Property and Land
Management Division under the Prime Minister’s Department
to repair and maintain the public service quarters. In addition,
RM150 million and RM250 million will be allocated for the repair
and maintenance of Malaysian Armed Forces family housing
units (RKAT) and PDRM quarters respectively.
217. The country records its appreciation to the Malaysian
Armed Forces, Royal Malaysian Police, Fire Rescue Department,
Royal Malaysian Customs Department, doctors, nurses, teachers
and all civil servants for their services. For your effort and
dedication, the Government would like to announce a special
payment of RM500 for civil servants Grade 56 and below. For
government retirees, a special payment of RM250 will be paid
and this will be extended to non-pensionable veterans. All will
be paid before end of this year.
CONCLUSION
Tan Sri Speaker and Members of this August House,
218. There is a need for constructive engagement and open
dialogue. Multilateralism is still the best formula to resolve
any disputes. Disruption of the present global economic order
and global trading system will only result in growth to spiral
downwards where there are no winners, only losers.
219. It is against this backdrop that this Government crafted the
Budget tabled before you today. To boost our growth sustainably,
we need a more comprehensive industrial policy. Selective state
interventions are required to improve national competitiveness, raise
productivity, prioritize investment in strategic sectors, re-energise
export-led industrialisation and encouraging entrepreneurship.
Make no mistake – this Budget is growth-centric, with precisely
designed measures to optimise the impact on economic growth,
job creation and structural change, without compromising
our commitment to restore our fiscal health in the medium
term.
220. As a result of the budgetary measures the Malaysian
economy will remain resilient going forward - with GDP expected
to grow by 4.7% this year and improving to 4.8% in 2020, while
inflation is expected to remain well anchored at 2% in 2020. In the
event of continued worse-than-expected external environment, the
Government stands ready to step in with contingency measures
to provide further support or stimulus to growth.
221. This Budget builds its foundation on institutional reforms
that began last year. The hard work is paying off. Our country
Malaysia is among the best performers in the World Bank’s 2019
Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI). This is concrete proof
of a kleptocracy before and a democracy now.
222. With the hosting of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) 2020 by Malaysia, Malaysia is given a unique chance to
reintroduce our beloved country to the world. This is our opportunity
to prove that we are on the right track, a country that is proud
because we are clean, green, safe and prosperous. Now we are
filled with one purpose and one hope under the leadership of
YAB Prime Minister who has inspired various initiatives in this
Budget.
223. A vision of Shared Prosperity continues the tradition of
Vision 2020, infused with ideas, idealism, innovation, institutional
reforms and integrity to forge a new Malaysia. A New Malaysia
that offers as the birth right of all Malaysians, adequate medical
care; a good education; useful and remunerative job; decent
home; freedom from unfair competition and monopolies; human
dignity filled with rights and respect; and a society devoted to
religious tolerance and racial harmony, where our children grow
up free from fear but full of promise and opportunity.
224. A New Malaysia that belongs to everyone regardless
of age, race, religion, background or geography. From Perlis to
Sabah, let us unite to strive together so that the fruits of our
efforts can be shared equitably with care and respect for each
other. We are entrusted with this new hope as our duty; Let’s
strengthen national unity and integration towards building a
better life and brighter future for our children.
225. Tan Sri Speaker Sir, I beg to propose.
